# Tezos multi-asset smart contract specification

## Abstract

This document describes specification for Tezos multi-asset contract adapted from
the corresponding specification for [Ethereum](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1155).
Token standards like ERC-20 and ERC-721 require a separate contract to be deployed
for each token type or collection. Multi-asset contract manages multiple token types.
A new token can be created and configured without redeploying the contract. Both
fungible and non-fungible tokens can be stored in the same smart-contract.

New functionality is possible with this design such as transferring multiple
token types at once, saving on transaction costs. Trading (escrow / atomic swaps)
of multiple tokens can be built on top of this standard and it removes the need
to “approve” individual token contracts separately. It is also easy to describe
and mix multiple fungible or non-fungible token types in a single contract.

## Multi-asset contract overview

**Token type** is a specific token represented by its ID. **Owner** - Tezos address
which can hold tokens. **Operator** - Tezos address which initiates token transfer
operation. **Operator** must be approved to manage all tokens held by the owner
to make a transfer from the owner account.

Destination address for the token transfer operation MUST implement `multi_token_receiver`
interface, which MUST be called for transfer/mint transactions. Destination address
may reject receiving tokens by generating failure. This is considered a safety
feature ("safe transfer") to prevent unrecoverable tokens if sent to an address that
does not expect to receive ERC-1155 tokens.

Multi-asset contract supports atomic batch transfer of multiple tokens between two
accounts.

Administrative operations to create new token types, mint and burn tokens are not
part of multi-asset contract specification. Their implementation may differ depending
on the particular business use-case. This specification focuses on token transfer
logic only.

## Difference between Ethereum ERC-1155 and Tezos multi-asset contracts

Since Tezos and Michelson differ from Ethereum/Solidity, the following modifications
are made:

1. Tezos multi-asset contract does not emit events (a feature not supported by Tezos).
2. Tezos multi-asset contract does not implement ERC-165 `supportsInterface` entry
point.
3. Ethereum specification says that if destination transfer address is not a smart
contract (Externally Owned Account),then safety check is not performed. Otherwise,
if destination contract does not implement `multi_token_receiver` interface, the
transaction should fail. Michelson does not provide API to distinguish between
implicit (EOA) and originated addresses since Babylon version. Tezos specification
requires that safety check MUST be performed for ALL targets and that target contract
MUST implements `multi_token_receiver` interface.
4. Ordering requirements for batch transfers is relaxed. Since Tezos smart contracts
are referentially transparent, batch order must be preserved only for invocation
of `On_multi_tokens_received` entry point of `multi_token_receiver`
interface.
5. Tezos multi-asset contract implements only batch entry points. Original ERC1155
has both single and batch entry points. The motivation was gas use optimization:
single entry points *may* be implemented more efficiently. With Tezos multi-asset
contract more favor was given to simplicity.
6. Optional `ERC1155Metadata_URI` interface is not part of Tezos multi-asset contract
specification.
7. Tezos multi-asset contract use interfaces/entry point names (see next
section) which are different from Ethereum ECR-1155. We believe that the new names
better convey meaning of the operations.
8. Tezos does not have equivalent of Ethereum view function (although there is a
proposal to add one to Tezos/Michelson). `balance_of` entry point is specified using
continuation style view pattern, but can be converted into view in future.
9. ERC-1155 `safeBatchTransferFrom` entry point receives two separate arrays of
token ids and transfer amounts. Both caller and implementor of the contract are
responsible to match values from those arrays and enforce their consistency. Tezos
multi-asset contract uses single array of `tx` records which have all the
attributes specifying single transfer.

### Interfaces/entry point names

Interface names

|  Ethereum ERC-1155 | Tezos multi-asset |
| :--- | :--- |
| `ERC1155` | `multi_token` |
| `ERC1155TokenReceiver` | `multi_token_receiver` |

`multi_asset` entry points

|  Ethereum ERC-1155 | Tezos multi-asset |
| :--- | :--- |
| `safeTransferFrom` | N/A |
| `safeBatchTransferFrom` | `Transfer` |
| `balanceOf` | N/A |
| `balanceOfBatch` | `Balance_of` |
| `setApprovalForAll` | `Add_operator` \ `Remove_operator` |
| `isApprovedForAll` | `Is_operator` |

`multi_token_receiver` entry points

|  Ethereum ERC-1155 | Tezos multi-asset |
| :--- | :--- |
| `onERC1155Received` | N/A |
| `onERC1155BatchReceived` | `On_multi_tokens_received` |

## Specification

Specification is given as definition of Michelson entry points defined in
[cameligo language](https://ligolang.org). Multi-asset specification consists of
two interfaces: `multi_token` and `multi_token_receiver`.

**Smart contracts implementing multi-asset standard protocol MUST implement all
of the entry points in the `multi_asset` interface.**

**All smart contracts which can be a target destination for the token transfers
MUST implement all of the entry points in the `multi_token_receiver` interface.**

### `multi_token` entry points

```ocaml
type safe_transfer_from_param = {
  (* Source address *)
  from_ : address;
  (* 
    Target address. Target smart contract must implement entry points from 
    `erc1155_receiver` interface
  *)
  to_ :   address;
  (* ID of the token type *)
  token_id : nat;
  (* Transfer amount *)
  amount : nat;
  (* 
    Additional data with no specified format, MUST be sent unaltered in call to
    `On_erc1155_received` on `to_`
  *)
  data : bytes;
}

type tx = {
  token_id : nat; (* ID of the token type *)
  amount : nat;   (* Transfer amount *)
}

type safe_batch_transfer_from_param = {
  (* Source address *)
  from_ : address;
  (* 
    Target address. Target smart contract must implement entry points from
    `erc1155_receiver` interface
  *)
  to_ : address;
  (* Batch of tokens and their amounts to be transferred *)
  batch : tx list;
  (* 
    Additional data with no specified format, MUST be sent unaltered in call to
    `On_erc1155_batch_received` on `to_`
  *)
  data : bytes;
}

type balance_request = {
  owner : address; (* The address of the token holder *)
  token_id : nat;  (* ID of the  token *)
}

type balance_of_param = {
  balance_request : balance_request;
  balance_view : (balance_request * nat) -> operation;
}

type balance_of_batch_param = {
  balance_request : balance_request list;
  balance_view : ((balance_request * nat) list) -> operation;
}

type set_approval_for_all_param = {
  (* Address to add or remove from the set of authorized operators for sender *)
  operator : address;
  (* True if the operator is approved, false to revoke approval *)
  approved : bool;
}

type is_approved_for_all_request = {
  owner : address;    (* The owner of the tokens *)
  operator : address; (* Address of authorized operator *)
}
type is_approved_for_all_param = {
  is_approved_for_all_request : is_approved_for_all_request;
  approved_view : (is_approved_for_all_request * bool) -> operation
}

(* ERC1155 entry points *)
type erc1155 =
  (*
    Transfers specified `amount` of a `token_id` from the `from_` address to the
    `to_` address specified (with safety call). Caller must be approved to manage
    the tokens being transferred out of the `from` account (see "Approval" section
    of the standard).
    MUST revert if balance of holder for token `token_id` is lower than the
    `amount` sent.
    MUST call `On_erc1155_received` on `to_` and act appropriately (see
    "Safe Transfer Rules" section of the standard).
    If `to_` contract implements `erc1155_receiver` interface. Otherwise skips
    safety check.
  *)
  | Safe_transfer_from of safe_transfer_from_param
  (*
    Transfers specified `amount`(s) of `token_id`(s) from the `from` address to
    the `to_` address specified (with safety call).
    Caller must be approved to manage the tokens being transferred out of the
    `from` account (see "Approval" section of the standard).
    MUST revert if any of the balance(s) of the holder(s) for token(s) is lower
    than the respective amount(s) in `_values` sent to the recipient.
    MUST call the relevant `erc1155_token_receiver` hook(s) on `to_` and act
    appropriately (see "Safe Transfer Rules" section of the standard).
    If `to_` contract implements `erc1155_receiver` interface. Otherwise skips
    safety check.
  *)
  | Safe_batch_transfer_from of safe_batch_transfer_from_param
  (* Get the balance of an account's tokens. *)
  | Balance_of of balance_of_param
  (* Get the balance of multiple account/token pairs *)
  | Balance_of_batch of balance_of_batch_param
   (*
    Enable or disable approval for a third party ("operator") to manage all of
    the caller's tokens.
  *)
  | Set_approval_for_all of set_approval_for_all_param
  (* Queries the approval status of an operator for a given owner. *)
  | Is_approved_for_all of is_approved_for_all_param
```

#### `transfer` Rules

Transfers amounts specified in the batch between two given addresses. Transfers
should happen atomically: if at least one specified transfer cannot be completed,
the whole transaction MUST fail.

Sender MUST be approved to manage the tokens being transferred out of the `from_`
account or be the same address as `from_` address (see "Approval" section of the
standard). Otherwise the transaction should fail.

The transaction MUST fail if any of the balance(s) of the holder for token(s) in
the batch is lower than the respective amount(s) sent. If holder does not hold any
tokens of type `token_id`, holder's balance is interpreted as zero.

The transaction MUST call entry point `On_multi_tokens_received` of contract `to_`
and MUST return call `operation` among other operations it might create. If `to_`
contract does not implement entry point `On_multi_tokens_received`, the transaction
MUST fail. `data` argument must be passed unaltered to a receiver hook entry point.
`On_multi_tokens_received` MAY be called multiple times from the transaction in
any combination and the following requirements must be met:

* The set of all calls to `On_multi_tokens_received` describes all balance changes
that occurred during the transaction in the order submitted.
* Receiver must be notified of each individual transfer only once.
* A contract MAY skip calling the `On_multi_tokens_received` hook function if the
transfer operation is transferring the token to itself.

#### `Balance_of`

Get the balance of multiple account/token pairs. Accepts a list of `balance_request`s
and callback lambda `balance_view` which accepts a list of pairs of `balance_request`
and balance.

#### Approval

The entry points `Add_operator`/`Remove_operator` allows an operator to manage
one’s entire set of tokens on behalf of the approver. To permit approval of a
subset of token IDs, an interface such as
[ERC-1761 Scoped Approval Interface](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1761)
is suggested. The counterpart `Is_operator` provides introspection into
any status set by ``Add_operator`/`Remove_operator`.

An owner SHOULD be assumed to always be able to operate on their own tokens
regardless of approval status, so SHOULD NOT have to call `Add_operator`
to approve themselves as an operator before they can operate on them.

#### Minting/creating and burning/destroying rules

A mint/create operation is essentially a specialized transfer and MUST follow safe
transfer rules in regard of invoking `On_multi_tokens_received` for the contract
which receives minted tokens.

### `multi_token_receiver` entry points

```ocaml
type on_erc1155_received_param = {
  operator : address;     (* The address which initiated the transfer (i. e. sender) *)
  from_ : address option; (* Source address. None for minting operation *)
  token_id : nat;         (* ID of the token type *)
  amount : nat;           (* Transfer amount *)
  data : bytes;           (* Additional data with no specified format *)
}

type on_erc1155_batch_received_param = {
  operator : address;     (* The address which initiated the transfer (i. e. sender) *)
  from_ : address option; (* Source address. None for minting operation *)
  batch : tx list;        (* Batch of tokens and their amounts which are transferred *)
  data : bytes;           (* Additional data with no specified format *)
}

(* ERC1155TokenReceiver entry points *)
type erc1155_token_receiver =
  (*
    Handle the receipt of a single ERC1155 token type.
    An ERC1155-compliant smart contract MUST call this function on the token
    recipient contract from a `Safe_transfer_from`.
    MUST revert if it rejects the transfer.
  *)
  | On_erc1155_received of on_erc1155_received_param
  (*
    Handle the receipt of multiple ERC1155 token types.
    An ERC1155-compliant smart contract MUST call this function on the token
    recipient contract from a `Safe_batch_transfer_from`.
    MUST revert if it rejects the transfer(s).
  *)
  | On_erc1155_batch_received of on_erc1155_batch_received_param
```

#### `Multi_token_receiver` Rules

If an implementation specific API function is used to transfer token(s) to a contract,
`transfer` (as appropriate) rules MUST still be followed and the receiver MUST
implement the `multi_token_receiver`.

Only non-standard transfer functions MAY allow tokens to be sent to a recipient
contract that does NOT implement the necessary `multi_token_receiver` hook functions.
